docs/CI_CD.md, before:

# CI/CD

## Overview

The CI pipeline runs linting, type checking, copy-paste detection (jscpd), build, tests, and then builds and publishes the Docker image.
CI uses Bun for dependency installation and script execution (no npm usage in workflows).

The Docker image is published to GitHub Container Registry (GHCR):

- Image: ghcr.io/<owner>/goldsphere-server
- Tags: <version> and latest (on release)

## Publishing to GHCR

The publish job runs after a successful semantic release on pushes to main. It logs in to GHCR using the built-in GitHub Actions token and pushes the image.

Required repository settings:

- Actions workflow permissions: Read and write
- Package visibility: set to public if you want anonymous pulls

## Pulling the image

Example pull command:

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/<owner>/goldsphere-server:latest
```

## Troubleshooting

- If the publish job fails with auth errors, verify Actions workflow permissions and that the workflow has packages: write.
- If pulls fail with 403, check the package visibility or authenticate with a token that has read:packages.
- If `bun install` fails with a 401 for `@marcopersi/shared`, verify `NODE_AUTH_TOKEN` is present and can access GitHub Packages.

## Releases (Conventional Commits)

Releases are created automatically based on Conventional Commits. The release job:

- Analyzes commit messages on main
- Creates a Git tag and GitHub Release when a new version is required
- Triggers the Docker publish job, which pushes two tags: <version> and latest

### Release outputs

- Git tag: v<version>
- GitHub Release: generated notes from commit history
- GHCR image tags: <version> and latest

### Pulling a specific release

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/<owner>/goldsphere-server:<version>
```

Example Conventional Commit messages:

```text
feat: add new custody provider integration
fix: handle empty portfolio response
feat!: remove deprecated payment endpoint
```

Commit message:

fix(ci): load test env from .env.ci fallback

docs/CI_CD.md, after:

# CI/CD

## Overview

The CI pipeline runs linting, type checking, copy-paste detection (jscpd), build, tests, and then builds and publishes the Docker image.
CI uses Bun for dependency installation and script execution (no npm usage in workflows).

The Docker image is published to GitHub Container Registry (GHCR):

- Image: ghcr.io/<owner>/goldsphere-server
- Tags: <version> and latest (on release)

## Test Environment in CI

Unit tests use `tests/setup.ts`, which enforces required env variables (fail-fast).

To keep CI deterministic:

- `.env.test` is used in local development
- `.env.ci` is committed and used as CI fallback
- load order is: existing process env -> `.env.test` -> `.env.ci`

This ensures GitHub Actions can run `bun run test:ci` even when `.env.test` is not available in the runner.

## Publishing to GHCR

The publish job runs after a successful semantic release on pushes to main. It logs in to GHCR using the built-in GitHub Actions token and pushes the image.

Required repository settings:

- Actions workflow permissions: Read and write
- Package visibility: set to public if you want anonymous pulls

## Pulling the image

Example pull command:

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/<owner>/goldsphere-server:latest
```

## Troubleshooting

- If the publish job fails with auth errors, verify Actions workflow permissions and that the workflow has packages: write.
- If pulls fail with 403, check the package visibility or authenticate with a token that has read:packages.
- If `bun install` fails with a 401 for `@marcopersi/shared`, verify `NODE_AUTH_TOKEN` is present and can access GitHub Packages.

## Releases (Conventional Commits)

Releases are created automatically based on Conventional Commits. The release job:

- Analyzes commit messages on main
- Creates a Git tag and GitHub Release when a new version is required
- Triggers the Docker publish job, which pushes two tags: <version> and latest

### Release outputs

- Git tag: v<version>
- GitHub Release: generated notes from commit history
- GHCR image tags: <version> and latest

### Pulling a specific release

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/<owner>/goldsphere-server:<version>
```

Example Conventional Commit messages:

```text
feat: add new custody provider integration
fix: handle empty portfolio response
feat!: remove deprecated payment endpoint
```
